New docs page: developer/accessibility.html (#14426)
jupyterlab/jupyterlab: docs/source/developer/accessibility.rst

.. Copyright (c) Jupyter Development Team.
.. Distributed under the terms of the Modified BSD License.

JupyterLab Accessibility: Developer's Guide
===========================================

If you're making changes to the JupyterLab source code and you're concerned
about `accessibility <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accessibility>`__, this page
is for you.

Looking for other ways to `contribute to accessibility
<https://jupyter-accessibility.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contribute/guide.html>`__?

Where to start
--------------

> A common question when accessibility-minded developers come to JupyterLab is:

Reviewer: I like saying thank you, though I will admit the step above [Contribute page](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/developer/contributing.html) does as well.

```suggestion
Thank you for being interested in improving JupyterLab's accessibility. Whether you are making accessibility-specific fixes or considering the accessibility impacts of another contribution, the work you do betters JupyterLab for everyone who uses it. 

Once they begin exploring the space, a common question when accessibility-minded developers come to JupyterLab is:
```

and more—in a more accessible way. However, be careful! Just because you can
implement a button using divs and aria attributes does not mean that you should!
(Most likely you should just use the button tag.) As a best practice, you should
only use ARIA when you cannot  use existing HTML elements (button, input, nav,
aside, etc.) to achieve the UX that you desire.

The rest of this section contains other best practices.

Use color variables from the CSS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When fixing contrast or other visual accessibility issues in JupyterLab, it can
be tempting to pick a color and apply it to the part of the UI that you are
working on. However, it quickly becomes unmanageable to have color values spread
throughout the app across different CSS files. Therefore, the JupyterLab
codebase defines a set of `color variables
<https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/blob/main/packages/theme-light-extension/style/variables.css>`__
that can be used for borders, icons, and such. If you're adding any CSS that
needs a color value, please use one of the variables defined.

Upstream fixes in Lumino
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> JupyterLab does not use React, Vue, or Angular; it uses a front-end framework

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JupyterLab uses a front-end framework
```

that was built specifically for it called Lumino. So some of the accessibility
issues tracked in the JupyterLab GitHub repo actually need to be fixed in the
Lumino repo.

It's not always obvious when an accessibility issue should be fixed in the
JupyterLab versus Lumino codebase. Generally speaking, if you can fix the issue
in Lumino, it's better to fix it in Lumino because then the fix will be absorbed
in more places. However, for that same reason, because Lumino is used by more
codebases than just JupyterLab—specifically, by JupyterLab extensions—one should

> be careful making changes to Lumino that might break downstream

Author: I wonder if this is a matter of tone or framing. 

I mean, yes, something is being asked of a developer reading this paragraph: it's to think carefully about code changes to Lumino. 

I didn't want to define breaking change, because it can be a bit fuzzy. A change to the API would definitely be a breaking change, but there are other changes that might not be formally declared as API but if you change it, then you will probably break code that depends on Lumino. For example, Lumino often adds a CSS class to elements when they are hovered to indicate that they are active. Downstream code relies on the presence of that class name to effectively create hover styles. If you change the code so that it stops applying that class, you will break somebody's downstream code.

> be careful making changes to Lumino that might break downstream

Author: Typical CSS in downstream applications:

```css
.something.lm-mod-active {
  /* change background color */
}
```

> be careful making changes to Lumino that might break downstream

Author: This is the only unresolved comment. I will tackle this again later, but if you have any thoughts in the meantime, please share them :)

   fail without your accessibility fix but pass after your fix is merged.
3. On your fork of jupyter-a11y-testing, using the instructions at the link
   above, manually dispatch the workflow to run your new test and verify that it
   fails.
4. Open a PR on Lumino or JupyterLab or both that contains your accessibility
   fix.
5. Using your _jupyter-a11y-testing_ fork, manually dispatch the workflow again,
   but this time configure the workflow so that it builds JupyterLab with your
   code fixes applied. For example, if your GitHub username is `a11ydev` and the
   name of your JupyterLab branch is `jl-a11y-fix`, then in the workflow form
   you would put `a11ydev/jupyterlab` as the repo and `a11y-fix` as the
   ref/branch/tag/SHA. If instead (or also) you have a fix for Lumino in a
   branch named `lm-a11y-fix`, then you would put `a11ydev/lumino` in the field
   for the external package repo and the name of your Lumino branch in the field
   for the external package ref.

Altogether, the form will look something like this before you submit it:

- JupyterLab repo: `a11ydev/jupyterlab`
- JupyterLab ref: `jl-a11y-fix`
- External package reo: `a11ydev/lumino`

> - Extrenal package ref: `lm-a11y-fix`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- External package ref: `lm-a11y-fix`
```

> 

Reviewer: This may be out of scope. Feel free to ignore if desired.

```suggestion

Manual Testing
---------------

Many accessibility issues become most clear when caught in action. Automated testing can be good at this, but you may also be able to find the impacts of accessibility of a contribution. 

One of the most approachable ways to try this is to try and complete a task related to your fix or contribution using an accessibility accommodation or setting. Common options include:

- Using a `screen reader`<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader>__. 
- Zooming the page up to 400% via your browser.
- Unplugging or not using your mouse. Navigate only with the keyboard.

While testing, take note of what happens and compare it to what you can do to complete the task without your chosen accessibility accommodation. If there is anything you cannot complete, then you have a blocking accessibility issue. Even though your use of assistive tech or an accessibility accommodation will likely differ from someone who uses them regularly, knowing the results is helpful to tell if JupyterLab is behaving as you expect.
```

Author: Thank you, this is great! I added this text but I kept the "manual testing" heading under the overall "testing" heading

The rest of this section contains other best practices.

Use color variables from the CSS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When fixing contrast or other visual accessibility issues in JupyterLab, it can
be tempting to pick a color and apply it to the part of the UI that you are
working on. However, it quickly becomes unmanageable to have color values spread
throughout the app across different CSS files. Therefore, the JupyterLab
codebase defines a set of `color variables
<https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/blob/main/packages/theme-light-extension/style/variables.css>`__
that can be used for borders, icons, and such. If you're adding any CSS that
needs a color value, please use one of the variables defined.

Upstream fixes in Lumino
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> JupyterLab does uses a front-end framework that was built specifically for it

Author: ```suggestion
JupyterLab uses a front-end framework that was built specifically for it
```

3. On your fork of jupyter-a11y-testing, using the instructions at the link
   above, manually dispatch the workflow to run your new test and verify that it
   fails.
4. Open a PR on Lumino or JupyterLab or both that contains your accessibility
   fix.
5. Using your _jupyter-a11y-testing_ fork, manually dispatch the workflow again,
   but this time configure the workflow so that it builds JupyterLab with your
   code fixes applied. For example, if your GitHub username is `a11ydev` and the
   name of your JupyterLab branch is `jl-a11y-fix`, then in the workflow form
   you would put `a11ydev/jupyterlab` as the repo and `a11y-fix` as the
   ref/branch/tag/SHA. If instead (or also) you have a fix for Lumino in a
   branch named `lm-a11y-fix`, then you would put `a11ydev/lumino` in the field
   for the external package repo and the name of your Lumino branch in the field
   for the external package ref.

Altogether, the form will look something like this before you submit it:

- JupyterLab repo: `a11ydev/jupyterlab`
- JupyterLab ref: `jl-a11y-fix`
- External package reo: `a11ydev/lumino`
- External package ref: `lm-a11y-fix`

> 

Author: Good idea. Added! I also think I might give this section a bit of a rewrite. I don't think it's super duper clear that we're talking about working in three different GitHub repos here: jupyterlab, lumino, and jupyter-a11y-testing

> 

Author: ```suggestion

[Detailed testing instructions for how to use the GitHub workflow](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing/blob/main/testing/jupyterlab/README.md#running-the-accessibility-tests-)
```

3. On your fork of jupyter-a11y-testing, using the instructions at the link
   above, manually dispatch the workflow to run your new test and verify that it
   fails.
4. Open a PR on Lumino or JupyterLab or both that contains your accessibility
   fix.
5. Using your _jupyter-a11y-testing_ fork, manually dispatch the workflow again,
   but this time configure the workflow so that it builds JupyterLab with your
   code fixes applied. For example, if your GitHub username is `a11ydev` and the
   name of your JupyterLab branch is `jl-a11y-fix`, then in the workflow form
   you would put `a11ydev/jupyterlab` as the repo and `a11y-fix` as the
   ref/branch/tag/SHA. If instead (or also) you have a fix for Lumino in a
   branch named `lm-a11y-fix`, then you would put `a11ydev/lumino` in the field
   for the external package repo and the name of your Lumino branch in the field
   for the external package ref.

Altogether, the form will look something like this before you submit it:

- JupyterLab repo: `a11ydev/jupyterlab`
- JupyterLab ref: `jl-a11y-fix`
- External package reo: `a11ydev/lumino`
- External package ref: `lm-a11y-fix`

> [Detailed testing instructions for how to use the GitHub workflow](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing/blob/main/testing/jupyterlab/README.md#running-the-accessibility-tests-)

Author: ```suggestion
[Detailed testing instructions for how to use the GitHub workflow](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing/blob/main/testing/jupyterlab/README.md#running-the-accessibility-tests-)

```

.. Copyright (c) Jupyter Development Team.
.. Distributed under the terms of the Modified BSD License.

Accessibility
=============

> **A JupyterLab Developer's Guide**

Author: Is there a way to do a sub-title in RST?

I want the link to this article in the "Section Navigation" TOC on the left to say "Accessibility."

I also want the "On this page" TOC on the right to have the following outline:

- Where to start
- Best practices while developing
- Automated Regression Testing
- PR Review and Manual Testing
- Useful tools for development

When I do the following:

```
Accessibility: A JupyterLab Developer's Guide
=============================================
```

I like the way it shows up on the page, but I don't like the way the sub-title shows up in the left side TOC. Is there a way to do what I want? Or is what I'm doing now the best that I'm going to get?

Author: Thanks to @krassowski who showed me [the trick](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/pull/14426/files#diff-b812e9d851d8dea2349e3c88ce22b7f9dad035d39cbff8cce389ed9782673e92R50)!

Therefore there is an effort underway to use `Playwright
<https://playwright.dev>`__ to write user-level `accessibility tests to
JupyterLab
<https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing/tree/main/testing/jupyterlab>`__.
To illustrate how to use it within your development process, let's walk through
an example.

This example will involve three separate GitHub repos:

1. `Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing
   <https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing>`__
2. `jupyterlab/lumino <https://github.com/jupyterlab/lumino>`__
3. `jupyterlab/jupyterlab <https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab>`__

This is a real world example, taken from actual past work.

Let's say you do an accessibility audit of the start page of the JupyterLab UI
and find a tab trap in the top menu bar, meaning the user can press the tab key
to get into the menu bar but cannot easily get past it using only the keyboard.

You dig in further and discover that the `tab trap bug is in the
jupyterlab/lumino repo <https://github.com/jupyterlab/lumino/pull/373>`__, so
you fork the jupyterlab/lumino repo, create a new branch called
``fix-tab-trap``, and open a pull request.

> You decide that you want to write a test. This is one of those cases where you
> can fairly easily write a unit test. However, a unit test would only check the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You decide that you want to write a test. This is one of those cases where writing a unit test would be a straightforward task. However, a unit test would only check the
```

I usually avoid using terms like "easy" for inclusion (so feel free to ignore)

This test checks that there are no tab traps on the JupyterLab start page by
using Playwright to open JupyterLab and press the tab key repeatedly. So as with
the Lumino repo before, you fork the Quansight-Labs/jupyter-a11y-testing repo,
create a branch called ``test-tab-trap``, and open a pull request. The important
thing in this step is that you save your test file with a ``.test.ts`` extension
next to the other regression test files.

Now you want to run your test. Specifically, you want to run the test against a
build of JupyterLab that incorporates your Lumino fix. Here's how you would do
that.

Let's pretend that your GitHub username is *a11ydev* and you've forked the
Lumino and testing repos and created the following branches on those forks, one
with your bug fix and the other with your test:

1. ``a11ydev/lumino:fix-tab-trap``
2. ``a11ydev/jupyter-a11y-testing:test-tab-trap``

On GitHub, go to your fork of the testing repo, *a11ydev/jupyter-a11y-testing*.
Make sure that you are on your `test-tab-trap` branch, which contains the

> .test.ts file that you added. Then go to Actions and click on the workflow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``.test.ts`` file that you added. Then go to Actions and click on the workflow
```

Author: I don't really want to call attention to this string, though. It's not actually a literal. If it were the actual literal file name, then I would want to format it this way. Should I put it in quotes or italics instead?

Author: Oh nevermind, I see that this is for consistency
